Feature/vonk 5238 restructure security docs (#336)
FirelyTeam/firely-docs-firely-server: security/tokens_and_compartments.rst

It is up to the authorization and the EHR to establish and exchange the launch context. See :ref:`firely_auth_endpoints_launchcontext` on how this can be achieved in Firely Auth.

Launch contexts combined with a CompartmentDefinition defines a -- what we call -- compartment in Firely Server. Firely Server will restrict the access of a client to a compartment if:

* the corresponding CompartmentDefinition is known to Firely Server, see :ref:`conformance` for options to provide them.
* the OAuth2 Token contains a claim with the same name as the CompartmentDefinition.code (but it must be lowercase).

.. _accesstokens:

Tokens requirements
-------------------

Note that it is out-of-scope of the SMART on FHIR specification to define the format of the access token.
SMART on FHIR solely defines the scope and launch context syntax. From a client perspective an access token is fully opaque.

> Firely Server is not bound to any specific authorization server, as long as the access token (JSON Web Token (JWT) or a Reference Token) contains a set of minimal information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firely Server is not bound to any specific authorization server, as long as the access token (JSON Web Token (JWT) or a Reference Token) contains a minimal set of information:
```

* the ``iss`` claim with the base url of the OAuth server
* the ``aud`` the same value you've entered in ``SmartAuthorizationOptions.Audience``
* the ``scope`` field with the scopes granted by this access token
* optionally, the compartment claim, if you'd like to limit this token to a certain compartment. For example, in case of Patient data access where the ``launch/patient`` scope is used, include the ``patient`` claim. Such a claim should be included by the authorization server if requested by using a context scope or launching a part of an EHR launch. 

> 

Reviewer: I would include part of a token that shows examples for all these fields.

> .. warning:: Firely Server will not enforce any access control for resources outside of the specified compartment. Some compartment definitions do not include crucial resource types like 'Patient' or their corresponding resource type, i.e. all resources of this type regardless of any claims in the access token will be returned if requested. Please use compartments other than Patient with caution! Additional custom access control is highly recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. warning:: Firely Server will not enforce any access control for resource types that are not listed in the applicable compartment definition. Some compartment definitions do not include crucial resource types like 'Patient', i.e. all resources of this type regardless of any claims in the access token will be returned if requested. Please use compartments other than Patient with caution! Additional custom access control is highly recommended.
```

> .. warning:: Firely Server will not enforce any access control for resources outside of the specified compartment. Some compartment definitions do not include crucial resource types like 'Patient' or their corresponding resource type, i.e. all resources of this type regardless of any claims in the access token will be returned if requested. Please use compartments other than Patient with caution! Additional custom access control is highly recommended.

Reviewer: I would already mention here that you should limit access to the resource types outside of the compartment using the scopes.

Patient-level scopes
--------------------
For Patient-level scopes the access control engine in Firely Server evaluates two types of authorization:

#. Type-Access: Is the user allowed to read or write resource(s) of a specific resourcetype?
#. Compartment: Is the data to be read or written within the current compartment (if any)?

As you may have noticed, Type-Access aligns with the concept of scopes, and Compartment aligns with the concept of launch context in SMART on FHIR.
Scopes are evaluated by checking if the application has been granted the correct rights to execute a certain CRUD operation.
The compartment access is evaluated by the filters defined in the SMART appsettings. See :ref:`feature_accesscontrol_config`::

   "Filters": [
      {
        "FilterType": "Patient", //Filter on a Patient compartment if a 'patient' launch scope is in the auth token
        "FilterArgument": "_id=#patient#" //... for the Patient that has an id matching the value of that 'patient' launch scope
      },
      ...
   ]

> For example, the authorization server provides a patient launch context with value `123`. This is to be interpreted by the application that the user instructs the application to work in the context of the resource `Patient/123`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the authorization server provides a patient launch context with the value `123`. This is to be interpreted by the application as "the user instructs the application to work in the context of the resource `Patient/123`".
```

Firely Server internally forms a compartment around all resources that are linked to `Patient/123` according to the Patient CompartmentDefinition.

.. note::
  To enable access to resources outside the compartment, the client must request additional scopes for these resources specifically.

There may be cases where the logical id of the focus resource is not known to the authorization server. Let's assume it does know one of the identifiers of a Patient. The Filters in the :ref:`feature_accesscontrol_config` allow you to configure Firely Server to use the identifier search parameter as a filter instead of _id::

   "Filters": [
      {
        "FilterType": "Patient", //Filter on a Patient compartment if a 'patient' launch scope is in the auth token
        "FilterArgument": "identifier=#patient#" //... for the Patient that has an id matching the value of that 'patient' launch scope
      },
      ...
   ]

Please notice that it is possible that more than one Patient matches the filter. This is intended behaviour of Firely Server, and it is up to you to configure a search parameter that is guaranteed to have unique values for each Patient if you need that.

> However you can also take advantage of it and allow access only to the patients from a certain General Practitioner, of whom you happen to know the Identifier::

Reviewer: Should we add a warning about performance consequences if the matching set is large?

Author: I would skip it. I haven't seen anyone using anything other then _id or identifier.

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Observation?code=x89``
      :Type-Access: User must have read access to Observation, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. 
      :Compartment: If a Patient Compartment is active, the links from Observation to Patient will be added to the search. In pseudo code: ``GET [base]/Observation?code=x89& (subject:Patient.identifier=123 OR performer:Patient.identifier=123)``

   #. Search on type not related to compartment

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Organization``
      :Type-Access: User must have read access to Organization, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. 
      :Compartment: No compartment is applicable to Organization, so no further filters are applied.

   #. Search with include outside the compartment

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Patient?_include=Patient:organization``
      :Type-Access: User must have read access to Patient, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. If the user has read access to Organization, the _include is evaluated. Otherwise it is ignored.
      :Compartment: Is applied as in case 1.a.

   #. Search with chaining

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Patient?general-practitioner.identifier=123``

>       :Type-Access: User must have read access to Patient, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. If the user has read access to Practitioner, the search argument is evaluated. Otherwise it is ignored as if the argument was not supported. If the chain has more than one link, read access is evaluated for every link in the chain. 

Reviewer: In this case 'ignored' will result in an error, so the request will not be authorized. We may need to make this explicit since in a normal search 'ignored' would result in all Patients matching...

        "FilterArgument": "_id=#patient#" //... for the Patient that has an id matching the value of that 'patient' launch scope
      },
      ...
   ]

For example, the authorization server provides a patient launch context with the value `123`. This is to be interpreted by the application as "the user instructs the application to work in the context of the resource `Patient/123`".
Firely Server internally forms a compartment around all resources that are linked to `Patient/123` according to the Patient CompartmentDefinition.

.. note::
  To enable access to resources outside the compartment, the client must request additional scopes for these resources specifically.

There may be cases where the logical id of the focus resource is not known to the authorization server. Let's assume it does know one of the identifiers of a Patient. The Filters in the :ref:`feature_accesscontrol_config` allow you to configure Firely Server to use the identifier search parameter as a filter instead of _id::

   "Filters": [
      {
        "FilterType": "Patient", //Filter on a Patient compartment if a 'patient' launch scope is in the auth token

>         "FilterArgument": "identifier=#patient#" //... for the Patient that has an id matching the value of that 'patient' launch scope

Reviewer 2: The comment needs to be updated to use "identifier" instead of "id"

      },
      ...
   ]

Please notice that it is possible that more than one Patient matches the filter. This is intended behaviour of Firely Server, and it is up to you to configure a search parameter that is guaranteed to have unique values for each Patient if you need that.
However you can also take advantage of it and allow access only to the patients from a certain General Practitioner, of whom you happen to know the Identifier::

   "Filters": [
      {
        "FilterType": "Patient", //Filter on a Patient compartment if a 'patient' launch scope is in the auth token

>         "FilterArgument": "general-practitioner.identifier=#patient#" //... for the Patient that has an identifier matching the value of that 'patient' launch scope

Reviewer 2: In the comment, do you mean "... for the Practitioner that has an identifier ..."?

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Patient?name=fred``
      :Type-Access: User must have read access to Patient, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. 
      :Compartment: If a Patient Compartment is active, the Filter from it will be added to the search, e.g. ``GET [base]/Patient?name=fred&identifier=123``

   #. Search on type related to compartment

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Observation?code=x89``
      :Type-Access: User must have read access to Observation, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. 
      :Compartment: If a Patient Compartment is active, the links from Observation to Patient will be added to the search. In pseudo code: ``GET [base]/Observation?code=x89& (subject:Patient.identifier=123 OR performer:Patient.identifier=123)``

   #. Search on type not related to compartment

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Organization``
      :Type-Access: User must have read access to Organization, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. 
      :Compartment: No compartment is applicable to Organization, so no further filters are applied.

   #. Search with include outside the compartment

      :Request: ``GET [base]/Patient?_include=Patient:organization``

>       :Type-Access: User must have read access to Patient, otherwise HTTP Status Code 403 is returned. If the user has read access to Organization, the _include is evaluated. Otherwise it is ignored.

Reviewer 2: This is the old behavior. Currently, if we only have scope `user/Patient.read`, we get 403 as well. So, to make `_include` works, we have to use both `user/Patient.read` and `user/Organization.read`
